\section{Alternative Formulations for Selective Functors}
\label{sec-alternatives}

This section discusses alternative versions of the \hs{Selective} type class
that are based on different \hs{select} operators: specifically, the
multi-way~(\S\ref{sec-alt-multi}) and symmetric~(\S\ref{sec-alt-symmetric})
generalisations of \hs{select}, as well as operators that are equivalent to
\hs{select} but may be more convenient to use~(\S\ref{sec-alt-equivalent}). All
of these ideas can be readily integrated into the presented definition of the
\hs{Selective} type class by extending it with new methods and adding new laws
that ensure that the new methods interact with \hs{select} in an appropriate
manner. This is common in standard Haskell libraries, where type classes
\hs{Applicative} and \hs{Monad} include methods like \hs{*>} and \hs{>>} for
performance reasons.

Another alternative, which is worth a remark, is to simply add \hs{select} to
the \hs{Applicative} type class, with the default implementation
\hs{select}~\hs{=}~\hs{selectA}. While this works for the purposes discussed in
this paper, it would make it harder to reason about code with the
\hs{Applicative}~\hs{f} constraint, since the \hs{select} method makes it
possible for effects to depend on values; declaring such a significant ability
by the \hs{Selective}~\hs{f} constraint is arguably a more prudent approach.

\subsection{Multiway Selective Functors}\label{sec-alt-multi}

As mentioned in~\S\ref{sec-selective}, \hs{branch} is a strong contender to be
the main method of the \hs{Selective} type class; it is parametric and all
selective combinators, including \hs{select} itself, can be derived from it:

\vspace{1mm}
\begin{minted}[xleftmargin=10pt]{haskell}
branch :: Selective f => f (Either a b) -> f (a -> c) -> f (b -> c) -> f c
\end{minted}
\vspace{0mm}
\begin{minted}[xleftmargin=10pt]{haskell}
selectB :: Selective f => f (Either a b) -> f (a -> b) -> f b
selectB x y = branch x y (pure id)
\end{minted}
\vspace{1mm}

\noindent
While we prefer \hs{select} for its simplicity, \hs{branch} does provide an
interesting advantage in the context of static analysis. Specifically, it makes
it statically apparent that the two branches are \emph{mutually exclusive}. When
\hs{branch} is ``desugared'' into a sequence of two \hs{select} operations, the
information about the mutual exclusion between the two branches is lost, which
rules out some static analysis scenarios. For example, it may be useful to know
that in our build systems example in~\S\ref{sec-static-example} we never depend
on both \cmd{lib.c} and \cmd{lib.ml}.

Another point in favour of \hs{branch} is performance: the \hs{select}-based
implementation of the \hs{ifS} combinator checks for the \hs{Left} and
\hs{Right} cases in sequence, instead of directly jumping to the correct case,
so a \hs{branch}-based implementation would be more efficient. Furthermore,
$N$-way generalisations of \hs{select} are possible, although the design space
here is quite large. As an example, one might consider adding \hs{bindS} to the
\hs{Selective} type class, i.e. a special case of the monadic bind operator that
is applicable only to enumerable types:

\vspace{1mm}
\begin{minted}[xleftmargin=10pt]{haskell}
bindS :: Selective f => (Bounded a, Enum a, Eq a) => f a -> (a -> f b) -> f b
\end{minted}
\vspace{1mm}

\noindent
The default implementation could be based on sequentially checking for every
possible value using \hs{select}, but monadic instances would supply a much
faster implementation, namely \hs{bindS}~\hs{=}~\hs{(>>=)}. This would allow
static analysis instances to record all possible cases, without incurring
the $O(N)$ slowdown during the execution of an $N$-way branch.

Interestingly, adding the ability to branch on infinite number of cases makes
selective functors equivalent to monads, e.g. see~\citet{peebles2019sigma}.
However, it is worth pointing out that static analysis of such
infinitely-branching selective functors might take infinite time too.

Exploring the design space for ``multiway selective functors'', and using them
for efficient translation of Haskell's \cmd{do}-notation into selective
combinators in the spirit of the \cmd{ApplicativeDo}
extension~\citep{marlow2016applicativedo} is left for future research. For now,
we believe that adding \hs{branch} and/or an equivalent of \hs{bindS} to the
\hs{Selective} type class would be beneficial for performance-sensitive
applications.

\subsection{Symmetric Selective Functors}\label{sec-alt-symmetric}

In this section we address the asymmetry of \hs{select}, which we remarked on
in~\S\ref{sec-haxl} and~\S\ref{sec-free}. The asymmetry can be seen in the fact
that the first argument of \hs{select} must always be executed, while the second
argument may sometimes be skipped. Consider a more symmetric alternative:

\vspace{1mm}
\begin{minted}[xleftmargin=5pt]{haskell}
biselect :: Selective f => f@\,@(Either a b) -> f@\,@(Either a c) -> f@\,@(Either a (b,c))
\end{minted}
\vspace{1mm}

\noindent
This definition is pleasantly symmetric: if either of the arguments yields a
\hs{Left}~\hs{a} value, the other argument \emph{may be skipped} since the
result must be a \hs{Left}~\hs{a} too, by parametricity. On the other hand, if
one of the arguments yields a \hs{Right} value, then the other argument
\emph{must be executed} in order to either get an \hs{a} or the other half of
the resulting pair. As an added bonus, the rather obscure associativity law
from~\S\ref{sec-laws} looks much more natural for
\hs{(?*?)}~\hs{=}~\hs{biselect}:

\vspace{1mm}
\begin{minted}[xleftmargin=10pt]{haskell}
@\blk{x}@ ?*? (y ?*? z) = fmap assoc <$> ((x ?*? y) ?*? z)
  where
    assoc ((a, b), c) = (a, (b, c))
\end{minted}
\vspace{1mm}

\noindent
While beautiful, we found \hs{biselect} to be a bit more awkward to work with
than \hs{select}, and also more subtle when the order in which the arguments
are executed is not fixed. So far we have identified only one example where the
symmetry of \hs{biselect} is beneficial: speculative execution of parallel OR
and AND combinators --- see the \Haxl case study~\S\ref{sec-haxl}. To support
such use-cases it is possible to add \hs{biselect} to the \hs{Selective} type
class with the following default implementation:

\vspace{1mm}
\begin{minted}[xleftmargin=5pt]{haskell}
biselect :: Selective f => f@\,@(Either a b) -> f@\,@(Either a c) -> f@\,@(Either a (b,c))
biselect x y = select ((fmap Left . swap) <$> x) ((\e a -> fmap (a,) e) <$> y)
  where
    swap = either Right Left -- Swap Left and Right
\end{minted}
\vspace{1mm}

\noindent
This implementation breaks the symmetry, which may be acceptable for most
instances of selective functors, but instances like \hs{Haxl} would override it
in order to gain additional performance benefits. Note that the selective
combinators like \hs{<||>} would need to be redefined via \hs{biselect} in order
to take advantage of the symmetry.

From the theoretical viewpoint, the type signature of \hs{biselect} makes it
more apparent that a selective functor \hs{f} is a composition of an applicative
functor \hs{f} and the \hs{Either} monad.

\subsection{Equivalent Formulations}\label{sec-alt-equivalent}

In this section we briefly mention three equivalent operators that can be used
instead of \hs{select}.

\begin{itemize}
    \item Lennox S. Leary and Edward Kmett suggested to move the function to the
          first argument:

\vspace{1mm}
\begin{minted}{haskell}
select :: Selective f => f (Either (a -> b) b) -> f a -> f b
\end{minted}
\vspace{1mm}

          This operator is similar to \hs{Applicative}'s \hs{<*>} but with a
          twist: the first argument might turn out to be a constant function
          \hs{const}~\hs{b}, in which case the effect \hs{f}~\hs{a} may be
          skipped.

    \item One can take one step further and extract the selection logic into a
          separate function:

\vspace{1mm}
\begin{minted}{haskell}
selectBy :: Selective f => (a -> Either (b -> c) c) -> f a -> f b -> f c
\end{minted}
\vspace{1mm}

         This operator is very convenient for implementing selective
         combinators, and also provides more opportunities for optimisation by
         fusing construction and deconstruction of \hs{Either}'s.

    \item Finally, it is possible to get rid of functions altogether:

\vspace{1mm}
\begin{minted}{haskell}
select :: Selective f => f (Either a b) -> f c -> f (Either a (b, c))
\end{minted}
\vspace{1mm}

          While this formulation requires an extra tuple allocation, it uses
          only sum and product types, and may therefore be useful in contexts
          where functions are unavailable.
\end{itemize}




% Arseniy's raise/catch

% Loops
